https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/eating-disorders

Eating Disorders
Overview

There is a commonly held misconception that eating disorders are a lifestyle choice. Eating disorders are actually serious and often fatal illnesses that are associated with severe disturbances in people’s eating behaviors and related thoughts and emotions. Preoccupation with food, body weight, and shape may also signal an eating disorder. Common eating disorders include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder.
Signs and Symptoms
Anorexia nervosa

Anorexia nervosa is a condition where people avoid food, severely restrict food, or eat very small quantities of only certain foods. They also may weigh themselves repeatedly. Even when dangerously underweight, they may see themselves as overweight.

There are two subtypes of anorexia nervosa: a restrictive subtype and a binge-purge subtype.

Restrictive: People with the restrictive subtype of anorexia nervosa severely limit the amount and type of food they consume.

Binge-Purge: People with the binge-purge subtype of anorexia nervosa also greatly restrict the amount and type of food they consume. In addition, they may have binge-eating and purging episodes—eating large amounts of food in a short time followed by vomiting or using laxatives or diuretics to get rid of what was consumed.

Anorexia nervosa can be fatal. It has an extremely high death (mortality) rate compared with other mental disorders. People with anorexia are at risk of dying from medical complications associated with starvation. Suicide is the second leading cause of death for people diagnosed with anorexia nervosa.

If you or someone you know is in crisis and needs immediate help, call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (NSPL) at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

Symptoms include:

    Extremely restricted eating
    Extreme thinness (emaciation)
    A relentless pursuit of thinness and unwillingness to maintain a normal or healthy weight
    Intense fear of gaining weight
    Distorted body image, a self-esteem that is heavily influenced by perceptions of body weight and shape, or a denial of the seriousness of low body weight

Other symptoms may develop over time, including:

    Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis)
    Mild anemia and muscle wasting and weakness
    Brittle hair and nails
    Dry and yellowish skin
    Growth of fine hair all over the body (lanugo)
    Severe constipation
    Low blood pressure
    Slowed breathing and pulse
    Damage to the structure and function of the heart
    Brain damage
    Multiorgan failure
    Drop in internal body temperature, causing a person to feel cold all the time
    Lethargy, sluggishness, or feeling tired all the time
    Infertility

Bulimia nervosa

Bulimia nervosa is a condition where people have recurrent and frequent episodes of eating unusually large amounts of food and feeling a lack of control over these episodes. This binge-eating is followed by behavior that compensates for the overeating such as forced vomiting, excessive use of laxatives or diuretics, fasting, excessive exercise, or a combination of these behaviors. People with bulimia nervosa may be slightly underweight, normal weight, or over overweight.

Symptoms include:

    Chronically inflamed and sore throat
    Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area
    Worn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth as a result of exposure to stomach acid
    Acid reflux disorder and other gastrointestinal problems
    Intestinal distress and irritation from laxative abuse
    Severe dehydration from purging of fluids
    Electrolyte imbalance (too low or too high levels of sodium, calcium, potassium, and other minerals) which can lead to stroke or heart attack

Binge-eating disorder

Binge-eating disorder is a condition where people lose control over their eating and have reoccurring episodes of eating unusually large amounts of food. Unlike bulimia nervosa, periods of binge-eating are not followed by purging, excessive exercise, or fasting. As a result, people with binge-eating disorder often are overweight or obese. Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder in the U.S.

Symptoms include:

    Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as a 2-hour period
    Eating even when you're full or not hungry
    Eating fast during binge episodes
    Eating until you're uncomfortably full
    Eating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassment
    Feeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about your eating
    Frequently dieting, possibly without weight loss

Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder

Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID), previously known as selective eating disorder, is a condition where people limit the amount or type of food eaten. Unlike anorexia nervosa, people with ARFID do not have a distorted body image or extreme fear of gaining weight. ARFID is most common in middle childhood and usually has an earlier onset than other eating disorders. Many children go through phases of picky eating, but a child with ARFID does not eat enough calories to grow and develop properly, and an adult with ARFID does not eat enough calories to maintain basic body function.

Symptoms include:

    Dramatic restriction of types or amount of food eaten
    Lack of appetite or interest in food
    Dramatic weight loss
    Upset stomach, abdominal pain, or other gastrointestinal issues with no other known cause
    Limited range of preferred foods that becomes even more limited (“picky eating” that gets progressively worse)

Risk Factors

Eating disorders can affect people of all ages, racial/ethnic backgrounds, body weights, and genders. Eating disorders frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood but may also develop during childhood or later in life.

Researchers are finding that eating disorders are caused by a complex interaction of genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors. Researchers are using the latest technology and science to better understand eating disorders.

One approach involves the study of human genes. Eating disorders run in families. Researchers are working to identify DNA variations that are linked to the increased risk of developing eating disorders.

Brain imaging studies are also providing a better understanding of eating disorders. For example, researchers have found differences in patterns of brain activity in women with eating disorders in comparison with healthy women. This kind of research can help guide the development of new means of diagnosis and treatment of eating disorders.
Treatments and Therapies

It is important to seek treatment early for eating disorders. People with eating disorders are at higher risk for suicide and medical complications. People with eating disorders can often have other mental disorders (such as depression or anxiety) or problems with substance use. Complete recovery is possible.

Treatment plans are tailored to individual needs and may include one or more of the following:

    Individual, group, and/or family psychotherapy
    Medical care and monitoring
    Nutritional counseling
    Medications

Psychotherapies

Family-based therapy, a type of psychotherapy where parents of adolescents with anorexia nervosa assume responsibility for feeding their child, appears to be very effective in helping people gain weight and improve eating habits and moods.

To reduce or eliminate binge-eating and purging behaviors, people may undergo cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which is another type of psychotherapy that helps a person learn how to identify distorted or unhelpful thinking patterns and recognize and change inaccurate beliefs.
Medications

Evidence also suggests that medications such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers may also be helpful for treating eating disorders and other co-occurring illnesses such as anxiety or depression. The Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) website has the latest information on medication approvals, warnings, and patient information guides.
Join a Study

Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individuals may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.

Researchers at NIMH and around the country conduct many studies with patients and healthy volunteers. We have new and better treatment options today because of what clinical trials uncovered years ago. Be part of tomorrow’s medical breakthroughs. Talk to your health care provider about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you.

To learn more or find a study, visit:

    NIMH’s Clinical Trials webpage: Information about participating in clinical trials
    Clinicaltrials.gov: Current Studies on Eating Disorders: List of clinical trials funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) being conducted across the country

Learn More
Free Brochures and Shareable Resources

    Eating Disorders: About More Than Food: A brochure about the common eating disorders anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder, and various approaches to treatment. Also available en español.
    Let’s Talk About Eating Disorders: An infographic with facts that can help shape conversations around eating disorders. Also available in en español.
    Shareable Resources on Eating Disorders: Help support eating disorders awareness and education in your community. Use these digital resources, including graphics and messages, to spread the word about eating disorders.

Research and Statistics

    NIMH Eating Disorders Research Program: This program supports research on the etiology, core features, longitudinal course, and assessment of eating disorders.
    Journal Articles: References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine).
    Statistics: Eating Disorders

Multimedia

    Mental Health Minute: Eating Disorders: Take a mental health minute to watch this video on eating disorders.
    Let’s Talk About Eating Disorders with NIMH Grantee Dr. Cynthia Bulik: Learn about the signs, symptoms, treatments, and the latest research on eating disorders.
