https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/what-are-eating-disorders

What are Eating Disorders?

Eating disorders are serious but treatable mental and physical illnesses that can affect people of all genders, ages, races, religions, ethnicities, sexual orientations, body shapes, and weights. National surveys estimate that 20 million women and 10 million men in America will have an eating disorder at some point in their lives.

While no one knows for sure what causes eating disorders, a growing consensus suggests that it is a range of biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors.  

 
Information by Eating Disorder
Learn more about eating disorders, including diagnoses, warning signs and symptoms, diagnostic criteria, and health consequences.
Read more >
Risk Factors
While eating disorders can develop differently in different people, researchers have found broad similarities in understanding major risk factors. Being aware of the risk factors is a vital part of recognizing when you or a loved one could need help. Risk factors for all eating disorders involve a range of biological, psychological, and sociocultural issues.
Read more >
Health Consequences
Eating disorders are serious, potentially life threatening conditions that can affect every organ system in the body. They are not fads or phases, and can have serious consequences for health, productivity, and relationships.
Read more >
Co-Occurring Disorders & Special Issues
An eating disorder diagnosis can be challenging enough on its own, but many individuals also have other psychological issues that can accompany the eating disorder.
Read more >
Busting the Myths About Eating Disorders
Though eating disorders affect us all, they are often misunderstood. Break through the myths and learn the truth about eating disorders.
Read more >
Stages of Recovery
Recovery is an ongoing, non-linear process. Knowing about the five stages of change that occur in the recovery process, Pre-Contemplation, Contemplation, Preparation, Action, and Maintenance/Relapse, will help everyone involved better negotiate the road to recovery.