https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/bulimia/symptoms-causes/syc-20353615

Overview

Bulimia (boo-LEE-me-uh) nervosa, commonly called bulimia, is a serious, potentially life-threatening eating disorder. People with bulimia may secretly binge — eating large amounts of food with a loss of control over the eating — and then purge, trying to get rid of the extra calories in an unhealthy way.
Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.

To get rid of calories and prevent weight gain, people with bulimia may use different methods. For example, you may regularly self-induce vomiting or misuse laxatives, weight-loss supplements, diuretics or enemas after bingeing. Or you may use other ways to rid yourself of calories and prevent weight gain, such as fasting, strict dieting or excessive exercise.

If you have bulimia, you're probably preoccupied with your weight and body shape. You may judge yourself severely and harshly for your self-perceived flaws. Because it's related to self-image — and not just about food — bulimia can be hard to overcome. But effective treatment can help you feel better about yourself, adopt healthier eating patterns and reverse serious complications.

Symptoms

Bulimia signs and symptoms may include:

    Being preoccupied with your body shape and weight
    Living in fear of gaining weight
    Repeated episodes of eating abnormally large amounts of food in one sitting
    Feeling a loss of control during bingeing — like you can't stop eating or can't control what you eat
    Forcing yourself to vomit or exercising too much to keep from gaining weight after bingeing
    Using laxatives, diuretics or enemas after eating when they're not needed
    Fasting, restricting calories or avoiding certain foods between binges
    Using dietary supplements or herbal products excessively for weight loss

The severity of bulimia is determined by the number of times a week that you purge, usually at least once a week for at least three months.
When to see a doctor

If you have any bulimia symptoms, seek medical help as soon as possible. If left untreated, bulimia can severely impact your health.

Talk to your primary care provider or a mental health professional about your bulimia symptoms and feelings. If you're reluctant to seek treatment, confide in someone about what you're going through, whether it's a friend or loved one, a teacher, a faith leader, or someone else you trust. He or she can help you take the first steps to get successful bulimia treatment.
Helping a loved one with bulimia symptoms

If you think a loved one may have symptoms of bulimia, have an open and honest discussion about your concerns. You can't force someone to seek professional care, but you can offer encouragement and support. You can also help find a qualified doctor or mental health professional, make an appointment, and even offer to go along.

Because most people with bulimia are usually normal weight or slightly overweight, it may not be apparent to others that something is wrong. Red flags that family and friends may notice include:

    Constantly worrying or complaining about being fat
    Having a distorted, excessively negative body image
    Repeatedly eating unusually large quantities of food in one sitting, especially foods the person would normally avoid
    Strict dieting or fasting after binge eating
    Not wanting to eat in public or in front of others
    Going to the bathroom right after eating, during meals or for long periods of time
    Exercising too much
    Having sores, scars or calluses on the knuckles or hands
    Having damaged teeth and gums
    Changing weight
    Swelling in the hands and feet
    Facial and cheek swelling from enlarged glands

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic
Causes

The exact cause of bulimia is unknown. Many factors could play a role in the development of eating disorders, including genetics, biology, emotional health, societal expectations and other issues.
Risk factors

Girls and women are more likely to have bulimia than boys and men are. Bulimia often begins in the late teens or early adulthood.

Factors that increase your risk of bulimia may include:

    Biology. People with first-degree relatives (siblings, parents or children) with an eating disorder may be more likely to develop an eating disorder, suggesting a possible genetic link. Being overweight as a child or teen may increase the risk.
    Psychological and emotional issues. Psychological and emotional problems, such as depression, anxiety disorders or substance use disorders are closely linked with eating disorders. People with bulimia may feel negatively about themselves. In some cases, traumatic events and environmental stress may be contributing factors.
    Dieting. People who diet are at higher risk of developing eating disorders. Many people with bulimia severely restrict calories between binge episodes, which may trigger an urge to again binge eat and then purge. Other triggers for bingeing can include stress, poor body self-image, food and boredom.

Complications

Bulimia may cause numerous serious and even life-threatening complications. Possible complications include:

    Negative self-esteem and problems with relationships and social functioning
    Dehydration, which can lead to major medical problems, such as kidney failure
    Heart problems, such as an irregular heartbeat or heart failure
    Severe tooth decay and gum disease
    Absent or irregular periods in females
    Digestive problems
    Anxiety, depression, personality disorders or bipolar disorder
    Misuse of alcohol or drugs
    Self-injury, suicidal thoughts or suicide

Prevention

Although there's no sure way to prevent bulimia, you can steer someone toward healthier behavior or professional treatment before the situation worsens. Here's how you can help:

    Foster and reinforce a healthy body image in your children, no matter what their size or shape. Help them build confidence in ways other than their appearance.
    Have regular, enjoyable family meals.
    Avoid talking about weight at home. Focus instead on having a healthy lifestyle.
    Discourage dieting, especially when it involves unhealthy weight-control behaviors, such as fasting, using weight-loss supplements or laxatives, or self-induced vomiting.
    Talk with your primary care provider. He or she may be in a good position to identify early indicators of an eating disorder and help prevent its development.
    If you notice a relative or friend who seems to have food issues that could lead to or indicate an eating disorder, consider supportively talking to the person about these issues and ask how you can help.
