https://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/learn/by-eating-disorder/bulimia

Bulimia Nervosa

Bulimia nervosa is a serious, potentially life-threatening eating disorder characterized by a cycle of bingeing and compensatory behaviors such as self-induced vomiting designed to undo or compensate for the effects of binge eating.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA

According to the DSM-5, the official diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa are:

    Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized by both of the following:
        Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g. within any 2-hour period), an amount of food that is definitely larger than most people would eat during a similar period of time and under similar circumstances.
        A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g. a feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
    Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior in order to prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting, misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications, fasting, or excessive exercise.
    The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, on average, at least once a week for three months.
    Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.
    The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa.

WARNING SIGNS & SYMPTOMS OF BULIMIA NERVOSA

Emotional and behavioral 

    In general, behaviors and attitudes indicate that weight loss, dieting, and control of food are becoming primary concerns 
    Evidence of binge eating, including disappearance of large amounts of food in short periods of time or lots of empty wrappers and containers indicating consumption of large amounts of food  
    Evidence of purging behaviors, including frequent trips to the bathroom after meals, signs and/or smells of vomiting, presence of wrappers or packages of laxatives or diuretics 
    Appears uncomfortable eating around others 
    Develops food rituals (e.g. eats only a particular food or food group [e.g. condiments], excessive chewing, doesn’t allow foods to touch) 
    Skips meals or takes small portions of food at regular meals 
    Disappears after eating, often to the bathroom
    Any new practice with food or fad diets, including cutting out entire food groups (no sugar, no carbs, no dairy, vegetarianism/veganism)
    Fear of eating in public or with others
    Steals or hoards food in strange places  
    Drinks excessive amounts of water or non-caloric beverages  
    Uses excessive amounts of mouthwash, mints, and gum  
    Hides body with baggy clothes  
    Maintains excessive, rigid exercise regimen – despite weather, fatigue, illness, or injury—due to the need to “burn off ” calories  
    Shows unusual swelling of the cheeks or jaw area  
    Has calluses on the back of the hands and knuckles from self- induced vomiting 
    Teeth are discolored, stained  
    Creates lifestyle schedules or rituals to make time for binge-and-purge sessions  
    Withdraws from usual friends and activities 
    Looks bloated from fluid retention  
    Frequently diets  
    Shows extreme concern with body weight and shape  
    Frequent checking in the mirror for perceived flaws in appearance
    Has secret recurring episodes of binge eating (eating in a discrete period of time an amount of food that is much larger than most individuals would eat under similar circumstances); feels lack of control over ability to stop eating  
    Purges after a binge (e.g. self-induced vomiting, abuse of laxatives, diet pills and/or diuretics, excessive exercise, fasting)  
    Extreme mood swings

Physical 

    Noticeable fluctuations in weight, both up and down 
    Body weight is typically within the normal weight range; may be overweight
    Stomach cramps, other non-specific gastrointestinal complaints (constipation, acid reflux, etc.) 
    Difficulties concentrating 
    Abnormal laboratory findings (anemia, low thyroid and hormone levels, low potassium, low blood cell counts, slow heart rate) 
    Dizziness 
    Fainting/syncope 
    Feeling cold all the time 
    Sleep problems 
    Cuts and calluses across the top of finger joints (a result of inducing vomiting)
    Dental problems, such as enamel erosion, cavities, and tooth sensitivity 
    Dry skin 
    Dry and brittle nails 
    Swelling around area of salivary glands 
    Fine hair on body 
    Thinning of hair on head, dry and brittle hair (lanugo) 
    Cavities, or discoloration of teeth, from vomiting 
    Muscle weakness 
    Yellow skin (in context of eating large amounts of carrots) 
    Cold, mottled hands and feet or swelling of feet 
    Menstrual irregularities — missing periods or only having a period while on hormonal contraceptives (this is not considered a “true” period) 
    Poor wound healing 
    Impaired immune functioning

Many people with bulimia nervosa also struggle with co-occurring conditions, such as:

    Self-injury (cutting and other forms of self-harm without suicidal intention)
    Substance abuse
    Impulsivity (risky sexual behaviors, shoplifting, etc.)
    Diabulimia (intentional misuse of insulin for type 1 diabetes)

Learn more about co-occurring conditions >

HEALTH CONSEQUENCES OF BULIMIA NERVOSA

The recurrent binge-and-purge cycles of bulimia can affect the entire digestive system and can lead to electrolyte and chemical imbalances in the body that affect the heart and other major organ functions.  

The body is generally resilient at coping with the stress of eating disordered behaviors, and laboratory tests can generally appear perfect even as someone is at high risk of death. Electrolyte imbalances can kill without warning; so can cardiac arrest. Therefore, it’s incredibly important to understand the many ways that eating disorders affect the body.